Add documentation of how to write an actor to upgrade process. (#500)
oamg/leapp: docs/source/actor-rhel7-to-rhel8.md

# How to create a Leapp actor for RHEL 7 to 8 upgrade

## Introduction

This document is intended for all people who want to contribute to RHEL upgrade process using Leapp tool. After reading through this document, you will be able to transform your expertise in certain parts of RHEL into improvements of the RHEL 7 to 8 upgrade tooling. You are expected to be familiar with the concept of in-place upgrades and ideally to have at least high-level knowledge about the Leapp tool.

## Setting up the development environment

Leapp actors are written in Python, so your usual Python development setup can be used during the process of creating a new actor.

## Tools

> The main tools you will use for the actor development are listed below. Detailed documentation for both of them can be found [here](https://leapp.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

Author: Good catch! it's no make sense.

Thank you

# snactor new-actor MyNewActor
New actor MyNewActor has been created at /usr/share/leapp-repository/repositories/system_upgrade/el7toel8/actors/mynewactor/actor.py
# cd /usr/share/leapp-repository/repositories/system_upgrade/el7toel8/actors/mynewactor/
# tree
.
├── actor.py
└── tests
```

The main file of the actor is the actor.py in which you’ll write code for logic of the actor.

## Including an actor in the RHEL 7 to 8 upgrade process

Until now, you have created only boilerplate of a new actor and made it visible to Leapp. But, Leapp needs some more information about what to do with the actor. Specifically, in which **“workflow”** and in which **“phase”** the actor should be executed. A workflow is a sequence of phases. The only workflow available now is the one solving the upgrade of RHEL 7 to RHEL 8 and this document covers this workflow. Each phase is a set of actors that will be executed one after another before the next phase starts. To find out in which workflow and phase should the actor be executed, Leapp looks for **“tags”**. To be part of RHEL 7 to RHEL 8 upgrade workflow, an actor needs to be tagged with **IPUWorkflowTag**.

> The phases of the IPUWorkflow (in order) are: **Facts Collection, Checks, Report, Download, Upgrade RamDisk Preparation, Upgrade RamDisk Start, Late Tests, Preparation, RPM Upgrade, Application Upgrade, Third Party Applications, Finalization, Reboot** and **First Boot**. Each phase has a specific tag that marks an actor as being part of that phase. You can find descriptions of all the phases and their tags [here](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository/blob/master/repos/system_upgrade/el7toel8/workflows/inplace_upgrade.py) and [here](https://leapp-to.github.io/upgrades).

Author: You have a good point, but for now, while we are moving all the documentation to read the docs we need to leave this here, when we have a document for the phases, it is no longer necessary

# How to create a Leapp actor for RHEL 7 to 8 upgrade

## Introduction

This document is intended for all people who want to contribute to the process of upgrading Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) 7 to RHEL 8 using Leapp tool. The upgrade is performed in place meaning that the RHEL 7 installation is replaced by RHEL 8 on the same storage.
After reading through this document, you will be able to transform your expertise in certain parts of RHEL into improvements of the RHEL 7 to 8 upgrade tooling.

## Setting up the development environment

Leapp actors are written in Python 2.7+/3.6+ (the resulting code has to be both py2 and py3 compatible), so your usual Python development setup can be used during the process of creating a new actor.

## Tools

The main tools you will use for the actor development are listed below.

### leapp

The leapp framework uses provides the libraries required to be imported by any actor and also a binary tool used to control the execution of actors within a workflow.  

### snactor

Separate tool provided by Leapp to help the process of creating and executing an actor.

> You can see _snactor_ source code [here](https://github.com/oamg/leapp/tree/master/leapp/snactor).

Reviewer: I don't think it needs to be here, we don't tell users how to build leapp.
If you want tutorial on building packages then put it into new PR and mention all pkgs not just snactor.

> You can see _snactor_ source code [here](https://github.com/oamg/leapp/tree/master/leapp/snactor).

Reviewer 2: Ok, I agree that it might be added in an additional PR.

# cd /usr/share/leapp-repository/repositories/system_upgrade/el7toel8/actors/mynewactor/
# tree
.
├── actor.py
└── tests
```

The main file of the actor is the actor.py in which you’ll write code for logic of the actor.

For further information about how create an actor read this [document](https://leapp.readthedocs.io/en/latest/first-actor.html)

## Including an actor in the RHEL 7 to 8 upgrade process

Until now, you have created boilerplate of a new actor and made it visible to Leapp. But, Leapp needs some more information about what to do with the actor. Specifically, in which **“workflow”** and in which **“phase”** the actor should be executed. A workflow is a sequence of phases. The only workflow available now is the one solving the upgrade of RHEL 7 to RHEL 8. Each phase is a set of actors that will be executed one after another before the next phase starts. To find out in which workflow and phase should the actor be executed, Leapp looks for **“tags”**. To be part of RHEL 7 to RHEL 8 upgrade workflow, an actor needs to be tagged with **IPUWorkflowTag**.

> The phases of the IPUWorkflow (in order) are: **Facts Collection, Checks, Report, Download, Upgrade RamDisk Preparation, Upgrade RamDisk Start, Late Tests, Preparation, RPM Upgrade, Application Upgrade, Third Party Applications, Finalization, Reboot** and **First Boot**. Each phase has a specific tag that marks an actor as being part of that phase. You can find descriptions of all the phases and their tags [here](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository/blob/master/repos/system_upgrade/el7toel8/workflows/inplace_upgrade.py).

Reviewer 2: I know it was not in the gdoc, but Reboot is not and has not been a phase. Please remove it.

> The phases of the IPUWorkflow (in order) are: **Facts Collection, Checks, Report, Download, Upgrade RamDisk Preparation, Upgrade RamDisk Start, Late Tests, Preparation, RPM Upgrade, Application Upgrade, Third Party Applications, Finalization, Reboot** and **First Boot**. Each phase has a specific tag that marks an actor as being part of that phase. You can find descriptions of all the phases and their tags [here](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository/blob/master/repos/system_upgrade/el7toel8/workflows/inplace_upgrade.py).

Reviewer 2: I know it was in the gdoc, but Reboot is not and has not been a phase. Please remove it.

Finally, you can make your actor part of the “leapp upgrade” process and check how it behaves when executed together with all the other actors in the workflow. Assuming that your new actor is tagged properly, being part of _IPUWorkflow_, and part of an existing phase, you can place it inside an existing leapp repository on a testing RHEL 7 system. All Leapp components (i.e actors, models, tags) placed inside **/etc/leapp/repos.d/system_upgrade/el7toel8/** will be used by the “leapp upgrade” command during upgrade process.

### Verifying correct communication between actors

Leapp provides another actor, named [CheckOSRelease](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository/tree/master/repos/system_upgrade/el7toel8/actors/checkosrelease), that consumes messages from model _OSReleaseFacts_ and produces an error message in case system OS Release is not supported by Leapp upgrade process. In order to consume such message, _OSReleaseCollector_ actor needs to be executed before _CheckOSRelease_ and its message needs to be stored inside Leapp database. This process is controlled by the framework during the execution of “leapp upgrade” command.

> But, if you want to execute it manually, by tests purposes, you can also use snactor for it. First we need to make sure that all messages that will be consumed are generated and stored. For this example, this means running _OSReleaseCollector_ actor with the _--save-output_ option of snactor:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But, if you want to execute it manually, for test purposes, you can also use snactor for it. First we need to make sure that all messages that will be consumed are generated and stored. For this example, this means running _OSReleaseCollector_ actor with the _--save-output_ option of snactor:
```

    },
    "type": "Report"
  }
]
```

To flush all saved messages from the repository database, run `snactor messages clear`.

## Writing tests for an actor

[Read the tutorial](https://leapp.readthedocs.io/en/latest/unit-testing.html) for writing an running unit and component tests

## Best practices

Read the best practices [document](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository/blob/master/docs/best-practices.md) and [Python guidelines](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-guidelines/blob/master/python-coding-guidelines.md)

## Contributing actors to the Leapp project

Currently all Leapp elements (i.e. actors, models, tags) are stored under a public [GitHub repository](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository)

All new content that needs to be part of Leapp release distributed to all users should be proposed as a Pull Request in this repository.

**Before submitting your work for review, make sure you have read and followed the contribution guidelines:**

[Contribution guidelines for writing actors](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md)

> This [pull request](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository/pull/186) gives a good example of both guidelines-driven actor implementation and thorough test coverage

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This [pull request](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository/pull/186) gives a good example of both guidelines-driven actor implementation and thorough test coverage.
```

## Pull requests review processes

> Every pull request need to be reviewed by core-team members, for optimize this process please ensure your code is following some criteria:

Reviewer 2: @pirat89, this is really bad place to put such information. This fragments the docimentation event more than it is now.
Why isn't [this](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-guidelines/blob/master/contributing-guidelines.rst) good enough? If you want to add or change something in the PR, the linked doc is the place, not in this guide.

Reviewer 3: @bocekm  you are right. it sounds better to have it rather there and put here just the link to the doc.

Author: I added the link to the documentation that @bocekm mentioned

Reviewer 2: I rather meant to remove this `## Pull requests review processes` section completely from this tutorial.

@pirat89 can compare the https://github.com/oamg/leapp-guidelines/blob/master/contributing-guidelines.rst with what he has suggested here and create a new pull request to change https://github.com/oamg/leapp-guidelines/blob/master/contributing-guidelines.rst if needed.
